feat: post on testing react-tracking with jest and enzyme (#680)
artsy/artsy.github.io: _posts/2021-04-15-testing-react-tracking-with-jest-and-enzyme.markdown

---
layout: epic
title: "Testing React Tracking with Jest and Enzyme"
date: 2021-04-15
categories: [testing, tracking, volt, cms, enzyme, react-tracking]
author: matt-dole
comment_id: 680
---

Recently, I needed to test a button that would make a tracking call using
[react-tracking](https://github.com/NYTimes/react-tracking) and then navigate to a new page in a callback. This
presented some challenges - I wasn't sure how to create a mocked version of react-tracking that would allow a
callback to be passed.

> With some help from fellow Artsy engineers Chris Pappas and [Pavlos Vinieratos](https://twitter.com/pvinis), I got

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With some help from fellow Artsy engineers [Christopher Pappas](https://github.com/damassi) and [Pavlos Vinieratos](https://twitter.com/pvinis), I got
```

Author: thanks for this! I wasn't sure how best to tag you :)

PR, and now we wanted to make it execute a tracking call before navigating.

We use Segment for tracking, and their tracking setup relies on a JS snippet being available on your pages. That
snippet sets a `window.analytics` property, which in turn
[has a](https://segment.com/docs/connections/sources/catalog/libraries/website/javascript/#track) `.track()`
method. On a fundamental level, all of our tracking calls boil down to a call to `window.analytics.track()`, where
we pass a list of properties to `.track()`

# Adding react-tracking

First, there was a bit of setup required to get react-tracking working. The react-tracking package
[assumes you're using Google Tag Manager by default](https://github.com/NYTimes/react-tracking#custom-optionsdispatch-for-tracking-data),
but allows you to override that behavior with a custom `dispatch` function. In our case, we wrap our React apps in
a `<BaseApp>` component, so we added a new `<TrackerContextCohesion>` component with a custom `dispatch` that would
be available to all of our React apps:

```ts
interface TrackEventProps {
  data: { [key: string]: string }
  options: {}
  callback: () => void

> }

Reviewer: This is a meta comment that applies to all code throughout. 
- a) We should ditch all type annotations across the board. Type annotations presume a certain contextual completeness that can't be provided in a blog post and so these things just end up distracting from the point
- b) Mentioned in the PR description, and reading over I agree: Code should be "working" pseudocode, used to express the point in the most generic way possible. What we're trying to do is talk about tracking, jest and enzyme; readers don't care about our `action_type`, or error handling, or anything that's more complex than `someParamToTrack`.

Author: Great feedback, thanks @damassi! Trimmed out a bunch of non-essential code

export const trackEvent = ({ data, options, callback }: Partial<TrackEventProps>): void => {
  // Action can be something like "click" or "Viewed tooltip"; we pull it out and send it to Segment
  // separately since it defines the event type
  const actionName = data.action || data.action_type
  const trackingData = omit(data, ["action_type", "action"])

  if (actionName) {
    // This is where we actually call Segment and pass the tracking event
    window.analytics.track(actionName, trackingData, options, callback)
  } else {
    console.error(`Unknown analytics schema being used: ${JSON.stringify(data)}`)
  }
}

// We're following the instructions from react-tracking's README on overriding the dispatch function
export const TrackerContextCohesion = track(

>   {},

Reviewer: We should fill in this first arg with something just so it doesn't appear mysterious

Author: Good thinking! I added a comment  - filling it in felt weird because that wouldn't actually reflect what we're doing here (the first arg would be a tracking call, which we don't want to make when essentially overriding `dispatch`)

  {
    dispatch: (args) => {
      trackEvent(args)
    },
  }
)((props) => {
  return props.children
})
```

This allows us to make tracking calls in our components, including the passing of custom callback functions:

```ts
const { trackEvent } = useTracking()

// This type is defined in Cohesion, making it easy for us to ensure we have the correct tracking
// properties
const trackingArgs: ClickedEditArtwork = {
  action: ActionType.clickedEditArtwork,
  context_module: ContextModule.toDoList,
  context_page_owner_type: OwnerType.home,
  destination_page_owner_id: internalID,
  destination_page_owner_slug: slug,
  destination_page_owner_type: OwnerType.artwork,
  destination_path: "/artworks",
  label: "Add info",
}

const handleAddInfoClick = (): void => {
  trackEvent({

>     data: trackingArgs,

Reviewer: data: {
  somePropToTrack: 'Andy Warhol'
}

>     options: {},

Reviewer: Maybe fill in a couple options just so this param doesn't hang, and perhaps add an in-code comment linking out to the docs,

navigation started, so we would effectively lose that event. Segment specifically
[allows you to pass a callback](https://segment.com/docs/connections/sources/catalog/libraries/website/javascript/#track)
to their tracking function to their track function for this situation. The describe the optional `callback`
parameter as:

> A function that is executed after a short timeout, giving the browser time to make outbound requests first.

Thus, we pass the tracking data and the callback to the custom `track` call we implemented, and we're good to go.

# The problem with testing

Our use-case is simple enough, but we wanted to make that when the button was pressed, we would both execute the
tracking call and then navigate. A test checking that the navigation worked had already been implemented. However,
after moving the call to `window.location.assign` into a callback, our test started failing because our component
was trying to execute a tracking call before navigating.

The test that predated the addition of tracking looked like this:

```ts
window.location.assign = jest.fn()

const wrapper = mount(
  <TestApp>
    <ArtworksMissingMetadataItem {...props} />
  </TestApp>
)

> wrapper.find("Button").simulate("click")

Reviewer: For all assertion code, lets be sure to adhere to jest requirements

```tsx
it('does something when clicked', () => {
  wrapper.find("Button").simulate("click")
  ...
})
```

```

If you've used [Enzyme](https://airbnb.io/projects/enzyme/) before, this `wrapper` idea should be pretty familiar,
even without much of the testing context. If you're not familiar - it's basically a way of rendering a React
component in a testing environment.

So we were rendering our button, clicking on it, and expecting to try to navigate. How could we mock our tracking
call while still executing a passed callback?

# The final solution

Our mock ended up looking like this:

```ts
window.analytics = {
  track: jest.fn(),
}

jest.mock("react-tracking", () => ({
  useTracking: jest.fn(),
  track: () => (children): typeof children => children,
}))

const trackEvent = jest.fn((args) => {
  args.callback && args.callback()
})
;(useTracking as jest.Mock).mockImplementation(() => ({
  trackEvent,
}))
```

Let's break that down section by section. First:

```ts
window.analytics = {
  track: jest.fn(),
}
```

As noted above, all of our tracking calls assume `window.analytics` exists and that it has a `.track()` method. We
started by mocking that setup.

Next:

```ts
jest.mock("react-tracking", () => ({
  useTracking: jest.fn(),

>   track: () => (children): typeof children => children,

Reviewer: no types

}))
```

Here we mock the `react-tracking` package and two specific methods it exports, `useTracking` and `track`. We made
`useTracking` a Jest function - we'll flesh it out further a few lines farther down in the file.

Then there's the mocking of `track`. To put it in words, our mock is: a function that returns a function that takes
in `children` and returns those `children`. That might sound like gibberish at first blush, but essentially what
we're doing is mocking the function composition we performed earlier when creating `TrackerContextCohesion`. We
needed something that was the same shape as `react-tracking`'s `track()`, but we don't care about overriding
`dispatch` in our mocks.

Last:

```ts
const trackEvent = jest.fn((args) => {

>   args.callback && args.callback()

Reviewer: For example's sake we don't need to add logic

})
;(useTracking as jest.Mock).mockImplementation(() => ({
  trackEvent,

> }))

Reviewer: ```js
useTracking.mockImplementation(...) 
```

update our `useTracking` mock to make it return a function that returns an object with a `trackEvent` property.
What a mouthful! That sounds super confusing, but remember that we're trying to mock something that we actually use
like this:

```ts
const { trackEvent } = useTracking()
```

So basically, our goal was to mock `trackEvent` and we needed to emulate the shape it has when it's exported by
`react-tracking`. Hopefully that makes things a little clearer.

After some tinkering and eventually getting the mocks to work in a single test file, we moved these mocked
functions to a `setup.ts` file that all of our Jest tests load automatically. We chose to make these mocks
available to all tests because then we wouldn't get surprising test failures if we, say, forgot that we were making
a tracking call in a component and didn't explicitly mock the tracking calls in those tests.

At the end of the day, we can use these mocked calls in our test files by doing the following:

```ts
import { useTracking } from "react-tracking"

// This only works because we mock tracking in setup.ts

> const { trackEvent } = useTracking()

Reviewer: This is a bit strange because it breaks the [rules of hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-rules.html)

Reviewer 2: That made me curious. This exists https://github.com/testing-library/react-hooks-testing-library#usecountertestjs, but this feels like this is testing the hook, not checking expectations on a hook. I found https://chanonroy.medium.com/mocking-hooks-for-testing-with-jest-and-react-testing-library-d34505616d12 this one. Not sure if that's better.

Author: Hmmm yeah...I kinda think it's fine for testing purposes?

Reviewer: > I kinda think it's fine for testing purposes

Rules of hooks can never be broken unfortunately! It's kinda a weird flag for those who look at react code all day.

// Then inside a test where we expect tracking to be called:

> expect(trackEvent).toHaveBeenCalledTimes(1)

Reviewer: diitto

method. On a fundamental level, all of our tracking calls boil down to a call to `window.analytics.track()`. We
pass a list of properties to `.track()`, Segment receives the event and properties, and the resulting JSON is
stored in our data warehouse.

# Adding react-tracking

First, there was a bit of setup required to get react-tracking working. The react-tracking package
[assumes you're using Google Tag Manager by default](https://github.com/NYTimes/react-tracking#custom-optionsdispatch-for-tracking-data),
but allows you to override that behavior with a custom `dispatch` function. In our case, we wrap our React apps in
a `<BaseApp>` component, so we added a new `<TrackerContextCohesion>` component with a custom `dispatch` that would
be available to all of our React apps:

```ts
import React from "react"
import { track } from "react-tracking"

const trackEvent = ({ data, options, callback }) => {
  // Action can be something like "click" or "Viewed tooltip"; we pull it out and send it to Segment
  // separately since it defines the event type
  const actionName = data.action || data.action_type

>   const trackingData = omit(data, ["action_type", "action"])

Reviewer: We can remove this stuff as its very internal artsy specific. And looking closely, this whole function isn't needed since its just a wrapper for artsy's weird legacy vs modern tracking schema migration.

Can we just put everything in the dispatch below? Something like: 

```tsx
dispatch: ({ data, options, callback }) => {
  window.analytics.track(data.action, data, options, callback)
},
```

Author: Good call! making that update now

Reviewer: @mdole - were you going open a new PR for this?

  // This is where we actually call Segment and pass the tracking event. See their docs for more on
  // these fields: https://segment.com/docs/connections/sources/catalog/libraries/website/javascript/#track
  window.analytics.track(actionName, trackingData, options, callback)
}

// We're following the instructions from react-tracking's README on overriding the dispatch function
const TrackerContextCohesion = track(
  // This is blank because we're not actually tracking a specific event here, just modifying dispatch
  // so that all components in the tree can use it
  {},
  {
    dispatch: (args) => {
      trackEvent(args)
    },
  }
)((props) => {
  return props.children
})

export const BaseApp = (props) => {
  return <TrackerContextCohesion>{props.children}</TrackerContextCohesion>
}
```

This allows us to make tracking calls in our components, including the passing of custom callback functions:

```ts
import { useTracking } from "react-tracking"
import { Box, Button } from "@artsy/palette"

// Assumes that MyComponent is wrapped in <BaseApp> wherever it's used, giving
// it access to tracking context
const MyComponent = () => {
  const { trackEvent } = useTracking()

>   const handleClick = () => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  const handleClick = () => {
```
